---
title: Breast Cancer Risk with Hormone Therapy in Transfeminine People
author: Aly W.
date: 2020-04-25
references:
  - id: Satram2006
    author: 
      family: Satram
      given: [Sacha]
    title: Genetic and environmental factors and male breast cancer risk
    type: thesis
    issued:
      year: 2006
    URL: https://search.proquest.com/openview/eeea89874c8cd0e560c33e3e19470297
---
**TL;DR:** Jump to "Summary and conclusions" at the end.

# Introduction

Estrogens and progestogens induce [breast development](https://w.wiki/KUn) in
humans. This includes major roles for estrogens in pubertal breast development
and progestogens in the breast changes that occur during pregnancy in
preparation for lactation and breastfeeding. [Breast cancer](https://w.wiki/KUp)
is far more common in cisgender women than in cisgender men, and hormones are
well-known to be involved in the development and progression of breast cancer in
cisgender women. For these reasons, it's logical to assume that hormone therapy
in transfeminine people might increase the risk of breast cancer. This thread is
a review of this notion and of the available studies on the subject.

# Sex and age as breast cancer risk factors

The normal lifetime risk of breast cancer in women is about 1 in 8 or 12.5%
[@bangodellas2014], whereas the normal lifetime risk of breast cancer in men is
about 1 in 1,000 or 0.1% [@Yousef2017]. The overall age-standardized risk of
breast cancer in men is about 1 in 100,000 person–years (PY) [@Yousef2017;
@OttiniCapalbo2017]. In other words, 1 in 100,000 men are diagnosed with breast
cancer every year on average. Fewer than 1% of all cases of breast cancer are in
men [@Yousef2017; @Sun2017]. Thus, breast cancer is frequent in women but is
extremely rare in men.

[@OttiniCapalbo2017]: http://bit.ly/2WmwKsh
[@Yousef2017]: http://bit.ly/2U7QcpV
[@bangodellas2014]: http://bit.ly/2WmNjnA
[@Sun2017]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29209143

After sex, age is the strongest known risk factor for breast cancer
[@MomenimovahedSalehiniya2018]. Breast cancer risk increases exponentially with
age in premenopausal women [@DixCohen1982]. The risk of breast cancer in women
is about 1 in 600,000 at age 15; 1 in 75,000 at age 20; 1 in 1,500 at age 30;
and 1 in 175 at age 40 [@Anders2009]. After [menopause](http://bit.ly/2V9RhzA),
which typically occurs at 50 years of age, breast cancer risk continues to
increase but more slowly [@DixCohen1982; @Benz2008; @ColditzRosner2000]. This is
assumed to be due to the much lower levels of estradiol and progesterone in
[postmenopause](http://bit.ly/33jDOY1) [@DixCohen1982]. It has been estimated
that if it were not for menopause, there would be 6 times as many cases of
breast cancer in women, and hence presumably that a majority of women would
develop breast cancer in their lifetimes [@BriskenHessJeitziner2015]. Similarly
to the case in women, breast cancer risk in men increases exponentially up to
about age 65, and thereafter increases somewhat more slowly (Ottini & Capalbo,
2017; @CancerResearchUK). This may be related to
[andropause](http://bit.ly/2TT7PLi) in older age and consequent lower levels of
testosterone and estradiol [@Satram2006]. The typical age of diagnosis of breast
cancer is around 60 years in women and 65–70 years in men [@FerzocoRuddy2016;
@Giordano2018]. The figures below show the risk of breast cancer with age in
women and men [@OttiniCapalbo2017].


[@CancerResearchUK]: http://bit.ly/2UbfXFw
[@FerzocoRuddy2016]: http://bit.ly/3a50MV6
[@Giordano2018]: http://bit.ly/38UuVVO
[@BriskenHessJeitziner2015]: http://bit.ly/33m5Jqe
[@Benz2008]: http://bit.ly/2Wglu0c
[@ColditzRosner2000]: http://bit.ly/2TTKzfO
[@Anders2009]: http://bit.ly/3d17cXs
[@DixCohen1982]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7114800
[@MomenimovahedSalehiniya2018]: http://bit.ly/2x06rgy

![Age-specific incidence rates per 100,000 for male and female invasive breast
cancer in caucasian Americans from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End
Results \(SEER\) program of the National Cancer Institute \(NCI\) \(2003–2012\).
[@OttiniCapalbo2017]](https://preview.redd.it/3z60xlo9zxu41.png?width=1016&format=png&auto=webp&s=fad69cfe9a48d144d038c686bedfe2dab6b28f2c)

# Hormone exposure in women and breast cancer risk

Along with sex and age, research strongly implicates ovarian activity and
ovarian hormones—like estradiol and progesterone—as major risk factors for
breast cancer ([Ban & Godellas, 2014](http://bit.ly/2WmNjnA)). Later
[menarche](http://bit.ly/38LVGfe), earlier menopause, and breastfeeding—all of
which result in reduced lifetime ovarian hormone exposure—are associated with
decreased risk of breast cancer (Ban & Godellas, 2014; Momenimovahed &
Salehiniya, 2018). Surgical removal of the ovaries before 40 years of age is
associated with a 50% decrease in lifetime risk of breast cancer (Ban &
Godellas, 2014). [Antiestrogens](https://w.wiki/KUq) including [selective
estrogen receptor modulators](https://w.wiki/KUr) (SERMs) like
[tamoxifen](https://w.wiki/KUs) and [aromatase inhibitors](https://w.wiki/KUv)
(AIs) like [anastrozole](https://w.wiki/KUt) can be used prophylactically
long-term as [chemoprevention](https://w.wiki/KUw) against breast cancer in
high-risk postmenopausal women, providing 50 to 70% reduction in breast cancer
risk ([Mocellin, Goodwin, & Pasquali, 2019](http://bit.ly/2vp8tXp); [Nelson et
al., 2019](http://bit.ly/3aYFMiY)). Long-term estrogen and progestogen treatment
has been found to produce breast cancer in non-human primates, and high doses
may result in breast cancer developing at an earlier age than usual ([Cline,
2007](http://bit.ly/2Qjr6mO)).

Besides increasing breast cancer risk, ovarian sex hormones stimulate the
progression of active breast cancer. Antiestrogens are effective in the
treatment of active breast cancer ([Lumachi, Santeufemia, & Basso,
2015](http://bit.ly/3cXJMlT)), and [antiprogestogens](https://w.wiki/KUy) like
[onapristone](https://w.wiki/KUz) and [mifepristone](https://w.wiki/KU$) have
shown preliminary effectiveness in the treatment of breast cancer as well
([Palmieri et al., 2014](http://bit.ly/33jEkoV)). Administration of
physiological doses of estrogens to women with breast cancer has been reported
to accelerate tumor progression ([Herrmann, Adair, & Woodard,
1947](https://bit.ly/2UwUGrf); [Nathanson, 1947](https://bit.ly/3aBjFiT);
[Gellhorn & Jones, 1949](https://bit.ly/2ys2T7T); [Nathanson,
1951](https://bit.ly/2UQjF86); [Pearson et al., 1954](https://bit.ly/2w4yKur);
[Pearson & Lipsett, 1956](https://bit.ly/2Xa5a1R); [Kennedy,
1956](https://bit.ly/2ynufvK); [Kennedy, 1957](https://bit.ly/2Jv7pV8); [Dworin,
1961](https://bit.ly/2Jtp7IT); [Kennedy, 1962](https://bit.ly/39D2tIJ); [Green,
Sethi, & Lindner, 1964](https://bit.ly/2yjzvAo); [Kennedy,
1964](https://bit.ly/3dIuS3b); [Stoll,
1973](https://www.bmj.com/content/3/5877/446.short); [Forrest,
1989](https://bit.ly/33YUzIe)).

In accordance with the well-established relationships of ovarian activity and
ovarian hormones with breast cancer risk, [menopausal hormone
therapy](https://w.wiki/KV2) is associated with a higher risk of breast cancer
in peri- and postmenopausal women ([CGHFBC, 2019](http://bit.ly/2UdNHli);
[Wiki-Table](https://w.wiki/KV3)). This is true both for therapy with an
estrogen alone and to a greater extent with the combination of an estrogen and a
progestogen (CGHFBC, 2019). In terms of absolute risk of breast cancer with
menopausal hormone therapy, the incidence after 20 years of use is about
1.5-fold higher with an estrogen alone and about 2.5-fold higher with an
estrogen plus a progestogen per a large recent meta-analysis of all of the
available data (CGHFBC, 2019). Hence, the risk of breast cancer is higher with
combined estrogen and progestogen therapy than with an estrogen alone. In the
past it was thought that progestogens might be protective against breast cancer
due to antiestrogenic effects in the breasts ([Mauvais-Jarvis, Kuttenn, &
Gompel, 1986](https://bit.ly/2VkcjuY); [Wren & Eden,
1996](https://bit.ly/3bgJllc); [Gompel et al., 2002](https://bit.ly/3amqLa5)),
but this proved not to be the case. The higher risk of breast cancer with
menopausal hormone therapy was found to be causal in the [Women's Health
Initiative](https://w.wiki/KV4) (WHI), at least with the used regimen
(specifically [conjugated equine estrogens](https://w.wiki/KV5) (CEEs) 0.625
mg/day plus [medroxyprogesterone acetate](https://w.wiki/KV6) (MPA) 2.5 mg/day)
(about 1.25-fold higher risk after 5 years of therapy) ([WGWHII,
2002](https://bit.ly/3cLBxbp); [Chlebowski, Aragaki, & Anderson,
2015](http://bit.ly/2TT2y6r)). The WHI was one of the largest randomized
controlled trials (RCTs) ever conducted and allowed a rare chance to evaluate
causation in terms of long-term health effects of hormonal agents.

For a visualization of breast cancer risk with menopausal hormone therapy, the
figure below shows breast cancer risk over time based on modeling and data from
the observational [Nurses' Health Study](https://w.wiki/KV7) (NHS) ([Colditz &
Rozner, 2000](http://bit.ly/2TTKzfO)). As can be seen, menopausal hormone
therapy is associated with maintenance of the age-related exponential rate of
increase in breast-cancer risk that's normally blunted by the onset of
menopause.

[Incidence of breast cancer by age and hormone therapy status and type in
postmenopausal women. Based on a Poisson regression model using data from the
observational Nurses' Health Study. \(Colditz & Rosner,
2000.\)](https://preview.redd.it/egnpu4ndzxu41.png?width=1834&format=png&auto=webp&s=2b162f486f5092c1606a297cb544ead1b60120c3)

[Bioidentical](https://w.wiki/KV8) hormones like estradiol and progesterone are
associated with increased risk of breast cancer similarly to non-bioidentical
hormonal agents like CEEs and MPA (CGHFBC, 2019;
[Wiki-Table](https://w.wiki/KV3)). The risk of breast cancer with estradiol does
not appear to be different from that with CEEs (CGHFBC, 2019). Oral progesterone
has not been associated with an increase in risk of breast cancer with less than
5 years of therapy on the basis of the available data, which is in contrast to
progestins (CGHFBC, 2019; [Stute, Wildt, & Neulen, 2018](http://bit.ly/38NEtly);
[Mirkin, 2018](http://bit.ly/2w8XvWh); [Fournier et al.,
2007](http://bit.ly/38W1HGa)). However, oral progesterone is associated with
increased risk of breast cancer after more than 5 years of therapy, by which
point the risk appears to be similar in magnitude to that with MPA (CGHFBC,
2019; Stute, Wildt, & Neulen, 2018; Mirkin, 2018; Fournier et al., 2007). The
initial lower relative risk with oral progesterone might be related to the low
levels of progesterone that oral progesterone achieves and hence its
comparatively weak progestogenic strength ([Kuhl & Schneider,
2013](http://bit.ly/2wbOSKt); [Davey, 2018](http://bit.ly/38NYYOV);
[Wiki](https://w.wiki/KV9); [Wiki-Graphs](https://w.wiki/KVA)). As a result, a
longer duration of therapy (and/or larger sample sizes) may be necessary before
an increase in breast cancer risk with oral progesterone can be properly
quantified (Kuhl & Schneider, 2013; Davey, 2018). Virtually no data are
available on breast cancer risk with non-oral routes of progesterone at present
(Stute, Wildt, & Neulen, 2018). However, non-oral and fully potent progesterone
is anticipated by some researchers to have a similar risk of breast cancer as
progestins not only with long-term use but also with short-term exposure (Kuhl &
Schneider, 2013; Davey, 2018).

Although the overall evidence including both prospective observational studies
and RCTs shows an increased risk of breast cancer with estrogen alone therapy in
menopausal women (CGHFBC, 2019), the available RCTs, namely the WHI, have so far
been unable to show increased breast cancer risk with estrogen alone and have
instead found a significant *decrease* in risk (RR 0.77, 95% CI 0.64–0.93)
(CGHFBC, 2019; [Table](https://bit.ly/3bDnuVo)). Various hypotheses have been
advanced to explain the conflicting findings. For instance, the women in the
WHI, who constitute the vast majority of the RCT data, were atypical in that
they were of relatively old age at start of hormone therapy (average 64 years)
and were relatively overweight and obese (CGHFBC, 2019; [Kuhl,
2005](https://bit.ly/3eRzZPd)). Women who are overweight or obese are already at
an increased risk of breast cancer and may experience no further increase with
estrogen therapy (Kuhl, 2005). And women who have been deprived of estrogens for
many years may experience paradoxical inhibitory effects on breast cancer risk,
which is in contrast to women who start at menopause (also seen in the
observational data) ([Prentice, 2008](http://bit.ly/2w7R5Xi); CGHFBC, 2019).
This has been termed the "gap hypothesis" (Palmieri et al., 2014; [Mueck & Ruan,
2011](https://www.degruyter.com/view/j/hmbci.2011.5.issue-2/hmbci.2011.014/hmbci.2011.014.xml)).
More RCTs are needed to test these theories and determine the influence of
estrogens on menopausal breast cancer risk.

Paradoxically, estrogen and/or progestogen exposure can also decrease breast
cancer risk and inhibit breast cancer progression under certain other
circumstances. For instance, pregnancy lasting more than 34 weeks in young women
(<35 years of age) increases breast cancer risk in the short-term (<10 years)
but is actually protective against breast cancer in the long-term (>20–25
years), with an up to 50% reduction in lifetime risk ([Nichols et al.,
2019](http://bit.ly/33s8arq); [Husby et al.,
2018](https://go.nature.com/2w8WlKn)). Extremely high levels of estrogens and
progesterone occur during pregnancy (e.g., >12,500 pg/mL for estradiol at >34
weeks) ([Wiki-Graph](https://bit.ly/351RKH0)), and animal studies suggest that
these hormones are responsible for the protection ([Rajkumar et al.,
2003](https://bit.ly/2S62jTX)). High-dose estrogen therapy is an effective
treatment against breast cancer in women who are at least 5 years
postmenopausal, with similar effectiveness to antiestrogen therapy ([Bennink et
al., 2017](http://bit.ly/2Um5BDd)). Conversely, high-dose estrogen therapy is
not effective for breast cancer in premenopausal women, although it does seem to
work if massive doses are given (Bennink et al., 2017). However, these
beneficial effects of estrogens and progestogens against breast cancer risk and
progression occur under unusual circumstances (e.g., very high levels/doses
and/or prolonged prior sex-hormone deficiency) and are unlikely to be of
relevance to transfeminine people. In any case, they are interesting and I
intend to more thoroughly discuss these topics in a future thread.

# Female hormone exposure in men and breast cancer risk

In cisgender men, conditions related to lower androgen exposure and/or higher
estrogen exposure are associated with increased risk of breast cancer ([Ferzoco
& Ruddy, 2016](http://bit.ly/3a50MV6)). These conditions include testicular
problems and removal as well as liver disease (Yousef, 2017). Testicular
dysfunction and absence result in decreased androgen levels, while liver disease
results in higher estrogen levels due to impaired metabolism of estrogens. Both
types of conditions result in an increased ratio of estrogens to androgens, in
turn causing greater estrogenic stimulation of the breasts. This is presumably
responsible for the increased breast cancer risk. Breast conditions in men, like
benign breast disease and gynecomastia, have also been associated with breast
cancer risk ([Sasco, Lowenfels, & Pasker-De Jong, 1993](http://bit.ly/33kaSix)),
although findings are mixed for gynecomastia ([Giordano,
2005](http://bit.ly/2WihtZg)). In addition to health conditions, high-dose
estrogen therapy for prostate cancer has been associated with increased breast
cancer risk in cisgender men ([Thellenberg et al., 2003](http://bit.ly/2WeMkWB);
[Karlsson et al., 2006](http://bit.ly/2TQnb31)).

# Studies of breast cancer risk in transfeminine people

A companion Google Doc for this thread with a table of available studies on the
risk of breast cancer with hormone therapy in transfeminine people can be found
[**here**](http://bit.ly/2WihvAm). To date, three large cohorts and several
smaller cohorts have evaluated breast cancer risk with transfeminine hormone
therapy.

**Vrije Universiteit University Medical Center (VUMC) studies**

Most of the studies in the table are by the [Vrije Universiteit University
Medical Center](https://w.wiki/KVB) (VUMC) in Amsterdam, the Netherlands
([Asscheman, Gooren, & Eklund, 1989](http://bit.ly/2Wrhsm7); [van Kesteren et
al., 1997](http://bit.ly/2U7bxQi); [Mueller & Gooren,
2008](http://bit.ly/2U9qa5t); [Asscheman et al., 2011](http://bit.ly/3aS1V2q);
[Gooren et al., 2013](http://bit.ly/2xGrYeM); [de Blok et al.,
2018](http://bit.ly/39UCehN); [de Blok et al., 2019](http://bit.ly/2IPceZc)).
This clinic treats 95% of transgender people in the Netherlands (de Blok et al.,
2019). The studies by the VUMC are all on largely the same evolving cohort of
transgender women. For a couple of decades, the VUMC reported a low incidence of
breast cancer that was not much higher than the rate expected in cisgender men
(only 2 reported cases in 2,300 transgender women over an average duration of
hormone therapy of about 20 years) (Gooren et al., 2013). The typical regimen
used by the clinic was estrogen and high-dose cyproterone acetate. The studies
did not did not use systematic screening for breast cancer and instead
presumably relied on patient report for breast cancer diagnosis, raising the
possibility of under-detection of cases ([Feldman et al.,
2016](http://bit.ly/2w9hWSY)).

In 2019, the VUMC did another follow-up study but this time switched to a new
method of obtaining breast cancer diagnoses (de Blok et al., 2019). Instead of
simply asking patients whether they'd been diagnosed with breast cancer, the
researchers retrieved breast cancer diagnoses using an electronic system of
patient records for all of the Netherlands called the [Nationwide Network and
Registry of Histopathology and Cytopathology in the
Netherlands](http://bit.ly/2TQakxQ) (PALGA). When they did this, their number of
breast cancer cases shot up from 2 to 15. This resulted in a relative risk of
breast cancer of almost 50-fold the expected risk and an absolute incidence of
roughly 0.6% over a mean duration of hormone therapy of about 15 years. These
findings supersede all of the previous research by the clinic and indicate that
the true number of breast cancer cases in the VUMC cohort had been greatly
underestimated in their previous studies. Very large increases in risk, such as
the risk of lung cancer with smoking and the nearly 50-fold increase in breast
cancer risk in this study, can be considered as likely causal. Accordingly, the
increase in risk has been described by researchers using causal language (de
Blok et al., 2019; [Reactions Weekly, 2019](http://bit.ly/2xyQu1c)). Prior to
this study, it was thought that the increase in risk of breast cancer with
hormone therapy in transfeminine people was low, but due to the new data we now
know that this isn't necessarily the case ([de Blok, Dreijerink, & Heijer,
2019](http://bit.ly/2U7f9Sh)).

**Veterans Health Administration (VHA) study**

Another large cohort is the [Veterans Health Administration](https://w.wiki/KVC)
(VHA) cohort in the United States ([Brown & Jones, 2015](http://bit.ly/38T4lg3);
[Brown, 2015](http://bit.ly/33s8DtG)). In 2015, a study was published using data
from this cohort. The researchers reported 3 cases of breast cancer in about
3,500 people assigned male at birth with mean follow-up time of approximately 10
years. Hence, there was a rate of about 0.09% over an average duration of 10
years. Although the mean duration of follow up was shorter than in the VUMC
cohort, the total follow-up time was similar. The VHA researchers reported the
incidence of breast cancer as increased by 33-fold relative to the expected
rate. This is somewhat strange in that it's discrepant with the VUMC's 2018
numbers (which reported a 46-fold increased risk based on diagnosis in 15 of
2,300 people and mean follow-up time of 15 years). In any case, the VHA
concluded that the risk of breast cancer in transfeminine people was higher than
that in cisgender men and higher than that reported by the earlier VUMC studies,
but still lower than the risk in cisgender women.

The VHA paper provided no specifics on what hormone therapy medications and
doses were used, although since it included all patients treated by providers in
the VHA system, the regimens are likely to have been quite variable. Because
this was the United States, the typical regimen was probably estrogen plus
spironolactone and no progestogen.

There are a variety of problems with the VHA study that require discussion:

* As with the earlier VUMC studies, the VHA study did not use systematic
  screening for breast cancer and presumably relied on patient report for breast
  cancer diagnoses, raising the possibility of under-detection of cases (Feldman
  et al., 2016).
* The study was *irrespective of hormone therapy* (Feldman et al., 2016). Only
  some people in the cohort were on hormone therapy while others were not, and
  the researchers didn't have full numbers on who was and who wasn't. Moreover,
  an unknown percentage of people included in the cohort *weren't even
  transgender*—the researchers also included all cisgender men in the VHA system
  with a "transgender-related" diagnosis, which included transvestic fetishism
  (i.e., sexual crossdressing). Most of these individuals presumably were not on
  hormone therapy.
* The follow-up times for those who were definitely on hormone therapy were very
  short. Of about 1,400 transfeminine people in the VHA cohort who were
  certainly on hormone therapy, the mean duration of use was only 5.5 years, and
  was less than 3 years for nearly half of the sample.
* The VHA paper was very confusing and unclear. As an example, they misgendered
  transgender people, referring to them as "male" and "female" per birth sex,
  and wrote in such a way that made it difficult to understand who was who as
  well as who was and was not actually on hormone therapy. This was such that
  even some citing publications reporting on the study mistakenly got the risks
  for "male" and "female" switched (e.g., [Dente et al.,
  2019](http://bit.ly/2QiK0dD)).
* To add further confusion, the VHA researchers reported *33* total cases of
  breast cancer in the exact same cohort of 5,100 total people assigned male or
  female at birth in two other papers published around the same time ([Brown &
  Jones, 2014](http://bit.ly/3a4GPy5); [Brown & Jones,
  2016](http://bit.ly/2QhW8vg)). For comparison, they only reported 10 total
  cases in the 2015 paper (3 in those assigned male at birth and 7 in people
  assigned female at birth). The reason for this discrepancy is unknown ([Braun
  et al., 2017](http://bit.ly/33oYP3E)).

Due to the various problems with the VHA study, its findings are of limited
usefulness and should be considered with caution. The 2019 VUMC findings are far
better-quality data.

**Kaiser Permanente in California and Georgia study**

The third and final large cohort study was by [Kaiser
Permanente](https://w.wiki/KVD) in Northern California, Southern California, and
Georgia in the United States ([Silverberg et al., 2017](http://bit.ly/33jFCQN)).
They reported the incidences of a variety of cancers in a combined cohort from
three Kaiser sites consisting of about 2,800 transfeminine people. The mean
duration of follow up in the study was only 4 years. The researchers did not
report the incidence of any cancer that had an absolute occurrence of less than
5 cases, and breast cancer in transfeminine people was not included in the
relevant table of results nor in the discussion in the paper. Hence, there were
presumably fewer than 5 cases of breast cancer in the cohort of transfeminine
people. However, T'Sjoen and colleagues, a very reputable group of researchers
in the field of transgender medical research, reported in a citing publication
that the Kaiser team found a higher risk of breast cancer in transfeminine
people compared to cisgender men but a lower risk compared to cisgender women
([T'Sjoen et al., 2019](http://bit.ly/2U7fft7)). Assuming this is accurate,
which it likely is, the information was presumably obtained via personal
communication with the Kaiser researchers. Limitations of the Kaiser study
include lack of exact figures on breast cancer risk and a very short follow-up
duration. In addition, cancer diagnoses were retrieved only from Kaiser's own
systems, and the extent to which screening was systematic, if at all, is
unclear.

The Kaiser researchers plan to do further studies in much larger cohorts via
expansion to additional sites in the future (Silverberg et al., 2017). This is
an exciting development, and should hopefully give us additional data on health
risks in transgender people, including of breast cancer risk.

**Small cohort studies**

The remaining investigations of breast cancer risk in transfeminine people were
small. One was 50 post-SRS transgender women by the Ghent University Hospital in
Belgium who were followed up for an average of 11.4 years each, in whom no cases
of breast cancer were seen ([Wierckx et al., 2012](http://bit.ly/39ZrJtG)).
Another was 60 transgender women by the University Hospital Erlangen in Germany
([Dittrich et al., 2005](http://bit.ly/39ZrJtG)). No cases were seen in this
cohort either, although the treatment period was only 2 years. The last was
[Harry Benjamin](https://w.wiki/KVE)'s patient cohort; he communicated in his
1960s publications that he had treated about 150 transgender women with "medium
to fairly large doses of estrogen" for varying periods of time (e.g., 3 months
to 12 years) and hadn't encountered any cases of breast cancer ([Benjamin,
1964](http://bit.ly/38UkmSS); [Benjamin, 1966](http://bit.ly/2J1fgd7); Gooren et
al., 2013). These cohorts are all too small and limited to provide meaningful
quantification of breast cancer risk in transfeminine people.

**Discussion**

*Inconclusive quantification of breast cancer risk due to short follow-up times*

The available studies on breast cancer risk in transfeminine people are
inconclusive due to inadequate follow-up times (de Blok, Dreijerink, & Heijer,
2019; Mueller & Gooren, 2008; [Gooren, 2011](http://bit.ly/2TSLz3T); Gooren et
al., 2013; Brown & Jones, 2015). For instance the average durations of hormone
therapy in the VUMC and VHA studies were only 10 to 20 years. Breast cancer
incidence in cisgender women increases exponentially over decades during
premenopause and is very rare until old age. The typical age of breast cancer
diagnosis in cisgender women is 60 years, which includes about 50 years of
premenopausal hormone exposure and about 10 years of postmenopausal hormone
exposure. (The latter of which is not unimportant, as demonstrated by the
greatly decreased risk of breast cancer with prophylactic antiestrogen therapy.)
As such, due to the short follow-up times of the available studies of
transfeminine hormone therapy and breast cancer risk, we don't really know what
our true or lifetime risk of breast cancer is yet (Mueller & Gooren, 2008).

We do know however that hormone therapy in transfeminine people, at least with
an estrogen plus a progestogen in the form of cyproterone acetate, appears to
strongly increase the risk of breast cancer within about 15 years of use (de
Blok, Dreijerink, & Heijer, 2019). Fortunately, the risk is intermediate between
that in cisgender women and that in cisgender men (and not, e.g., *greater* than
that in cisgender women). At the same time however, the risk is non-negligible,
and the absolute incidence will only increase with longer follow-up times. In
terms of lifetime risk, the incidence of breast cancer in transfeminine people
is well on-track to be as high as single-digit percentages, at least based on
the findings of de Blok et al. (2019) and their particular hormone therapy
regimen.

*Breast cancer risk in relation to lifetime hormone exposure*

Transfeminine people may have a lower risk of breast cancer than cisgender
women. This may due at least in part to a more limited amount of lifetime
hormone exposure (Mueller & Gooren, 2008). This is based on the fact that, at
least historically, transfeminine people have started hormone therapy on average
at 30 or 40 years of age, which is decades after the age at which cisgender
girls normally undergo puberty (Mueller & Gooren, 2008). Additionally, youth may
represent a critical window of susceptibility for breast cancer risk ([Biro &
Wolff, 2011](http://bit.ly/2QiKhgF); [Biro & Deardorff,
2013](http://bit.ly/3b0nkq6)). However, the age at start of hormone therapy in
transfeminine people has been decreasing in recent times (Mueller & Gooren,
2008), and nowadays many start hormones in their teens or early twenties
([Reddit](http://bit.ly/2WhfEMm)). These individuals will have greater lifetime
hormone exposure, and presumably greater breast cancer risk, than many of the
transfeminine people of the past ([Sutherland et al.,
2020](https://bit.ly/2Vo4AvT)). Moreover, transfeminine people may be much less
inclined to stop hormone therapy at the normal age of menopause in cisgender
women (Mueller & Gooren, 2008). Many transfeminine people will likely stay on
hormone therapy their entire lives. This additional exposure may further
increase breast cancer risk (Mueller & Gooren, 2008).

*Breast cancer risk in relation to progestogens and dosage*

Based on findings that breast cancer risk is higher with an estrogen plus
progestogen relative to an estrogen alone in postmenopausal women, the risk of
breast cancer with hormone therapy in transfeminine people may likewise be
higher with dual estrogen and progestogen therapy (de Blok, Dreijerink, &
Heijer, 2019). Hence, it's possible that estrogen therapy without a progestogen
could have a lower risk of breast cancer than that observed by the VUMC with an
estrogen plus cyproterone acetate (de Blok, Dreijerink, & Heijer, 2019). It's
notable also that the doses of cyproterone acetate used by the VUMC result in
rather extreme progestogenic exposure ([Reddit](http://bit.ly/33R98gG)). The
extent to which breast cancer risk with progestogens is dose-dependent is
unknown. Whether or not estrogen dosage influences breast cancer risk, or if
higher levels have greater risk, is unclear similarly.

# X chromosomes and breast cancer risk

The [sex chromosomes](http://bit.ly/2wWvq4w) include the [X
chromosome](https://w.wiki/KVF) and the [Y chromosome](https://w.wiki/KVG).
Cisgender women typically have two X chromosomes (46,XX
[karyotype](https://w.wiki/KVH)), while cisgender men (and transfeminine people)
typically have one X chromosome and one Y chromosome (46,XY karyotype). It's
possible that a 46,XX karyotype—specifically the presence of a second X
chromosome—may be a major risk factor for breast cancer. [X-chromosome
gain](https://bit.ly/2ys71V6) and aberrant [X-chromosome
inactivation](https://w.wiki/KVJ) have been associated with breast cancer
incidence and aggressiveness ([Nakopoulou et al., 2007](http://bit.ly/3d49gxG);
[Di Oto et al., 2015](http://bit.ly/2waIZ03); [Lin et al.,
2015](http://bit.ly/3d0FpWV);[ Chaligné et al., 2015](http://bit.ly/3d0Fjyx);
[Di Oto et al., 2018](http://bit.ly/2QjaYld)). In addition, breast cancer risk
is markedly higher in men with [Klinefelter's syndrome](https://w.wiki/KVK)
(KS), who have a 46,XXY karyotype, than in regular men with a 46,XY karyotype.
Conversely, breast cancer has never been reported in women with [complete
androgen insensitivity syndrome](https://w.wiki/KVP) (CAIS), who have a 46,XY
karyotype similarly to transfeminine people ([Hughes et al.,
2012](http://bit.ly/2WjVH7t);[ Tiefenbacher & Daxenbichler,
2008](http://bit.ly/2U8nyET);[ Hughes, 2009](http://bit.ly/2vrGDK4)). This is in
spite of the fact that CAIS women have excellent breast development
([Reddit](https://bit.ly/34pq4eE)). However, hormonal abnormalities in people
with KS and CAIS may alternatively contribute to differences in breast cancer
risk and are thus a confounding variable. It's notable in particular that CAIS
women have relatively low estrogen exposure and little to no progesterone. In
any case, the differences in breast cancer risk in conditions like KS and CAIS
do not seem to be fully explainable by hormonal abnormalities. Thus, it's
possible that the lack of two X chromosomes in transfeminine people may indeed
prove to be partially protective against breast cancer risk. For more in-depth
information on this topic, see [**here**](https://bit.ly/2KA5xew).

# Summary and conclusions

Breast cancer risk is far higher in women than in men. The incidence of breast
cancer increases exponentially with age and is very rare in younger people.
There is strong basis to assume that estrogens and progestogens increase the
risk of breast cancer, which can be inferred as a major mechanism for the sex
differences in breast cancer risk. The available data do not indicate meaningful
differences between bioidentical and non-bioidentical hormones in terms of
breast cancer risk.

Older studies of transfeminine hormone therapy and breast cancer risk found low
incidences of breast cancer in transfeminine people. However, a recent study
with better methodology than previous studies showed a nearly 50-fold increase
in breast cancer risk. The hormone therapy regimen used by their cohort was
specifically estrogen plus cyproterone acetate. It's unknown whether other
hormonal regimens, for instance estrogen alone or with a non-progestogenic
antiandrogen, have similar risks. The available data on breast cancer risk in
transfeminine people are limited by inadequate follow-up times. As a result,
lifetime breast cancer risk is unknown. Based on available data however, we can
project into the future and assume that the lifetime incidence of breast cancer
in transfeminine people may be as high as single-digit percentages. This puts
the risk of breast cancer in transfeminine people somewhere between that of
cisgender men and cisgender women.

Various factors may modify breast cancer risk with transfeminine hormone
therapy. Examples include cumulative duration of use, age at start of therapy,
long-term progestogen use, and possibly dosages of estrogens and/or
progestogens. Our lack of a second X chromosome may be partially protective
against breast cancer. Although breast cancer risk with transfeminine hormone
therapy is something to be aware of—particularly the probable contribution of
progestogens to the risk—the lifetime incidence is likely to be low and the risk
appears to be less than that of cisgender women. In addition, it takes many
years of hormone exposure for breast cancer to occur and is generally restricted
to old age. Also, breast cancer is a highly treatable disease, with excellent 5-
and 10-year survival rates ([Cancer.Net](http://bit.ly/3aVv0dm)). For these
reasons, concerns about breast cancer shouldn't stop transfeminine people from
transitioning or from using hormone therapy.

The possibility of breast cancer with hormone therapy in transfeminine people
does, however, highlight the importance of routine breast cancer screening in
transfeminine people of appropriate age and duration of hormone exposure
([Chowdhry & O'Connell, 2020](https://bit.ly/34JTrZx)). It is recommended that
transfeminine people on long-term hormone therapy follow the same breast cancer
screening procedures as those of cisgender women (Chowdhry & O'Connell, 2020).
